.\" Copyright (c) 2026 CloudBSD Organization
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 23, 2026
.Dt NG_PPPOE_LB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_pppoe_lb
.Nd PPPoE load balancer netgraph node type for multithreaded PPPoE
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In netgraph.h
.In netgraph/ng_pppoe_lb.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm pppoe_lb
node type provides session-aware load balancing for multiple PPPoE worker nodes,
enabling multithreaded PPPoE processing on multi-core systems.
It distributes PPPoE discovery packets across worker nodes and maintains
session affinity for data packets by hashing the PPPoE Session ID.
.Pp
This node type is designed to work with multiple
.Xr ng_pppoe 4
worker nodes, allowing parallel processing of PPPoE sessions across multiple
CPU cores while preserving per-session packet ordering.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va downstream"
.It Va upstream
The hook connected to the Ethernet interface (typically from an
.Xr ng_ether 4
node).
All incoming PPPoE packets from the network arrive on this hook.
.It Va downstream
Multiple downstream hooks, one for each worker node.
Each downstream hook corresponds to a specific
.Xr ng_pppoe 4
worker node that will handle sessions assigned to it.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Dv NGM_PPPOE_LB_GET_STATS
Returns statistics in a
.Dv "struct ng_pppoe_lb_stats" :
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
struct ng_pppoe_lb_stats {
    uint64_t  total_packets;      /* Total packets processed */
    uint64_t  discovery_packets;  /* PADI/PADO/PADR/PADS packets */
    uint64_t  session_packets;    /* Session data packets */
    uint64_t  session_collisions; /* Hash collisions detected */
    uint32_t  active_workers;     /* Number of active worker nodes */
    uint32_t  active_sessions;    /* Number of active sessions */
    uint32_t  algorithm;          /* Current load balancing algorithm */
    uint32_t  max_workers;        /* Governor maximum workers */
};
.Ed
.It Dv NGM_PPPOE_LB_GET_SESSION_MAP
Returns the session-to-worker mapping table in a
.Dv "struct ng_pppoe_lb_session_map" :
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
struct ng_pppoe_lb_session_entry {
    uint16_t  session_id;    /* PPPoE Session ID */
    uint8_t   worker_id;     /* Assigned worker node index */
    uint8_t   reserved;      /* Reserved for future use */
};

struct ng_pppoe_lb_session_map {
    uint32_t  count;                      /* Number of entries */
    struct ng_pppoe_lb_session_entry entries[]; /* Flexible array */
};
.Ed
.It Dv NGM_PPPOE_LB_CONFIG
Configure runtime parameters using a
.Dv "struct ng_pppoe_lb_config" :
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
struct ng_pppoe_lb_config {
    uint32_t  algorithm;     /* Load balancing algorithm (0=round-robin, 1=hash, 2=least-loaded) */
    uint32_t  max_workers;   /* Governor maximum workers (0=auto/mp_ncpus) */
    uint32_t  debug;         /* Enable debug logging (0=off, 1=on) */
};
.Ed
.El
.Sh LOAD BALANCING ALGORITHMS
The load balancer supports three algorithms:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Cm 0
.Pq Cm round-robin
Discovery packets are distributed evenly across all worker nodes.
Session packets are routed based on Session ID hash.
This is the default algorithm.
.It Cm 1
.Pq Cm hash
Both discovery and session packets use consistent hashing.
Provides better load distribution but may be less predictable.
.It Cm 2
.Pq Cm least-loaded
Attempts to route to the worker with fewest active sessions.
Requires session tracking overhead; not recommended for high-throughput scenarios.
.El
.Sh CPU GOVERNOR
The load balancer includes a CPU governor that monitors system-wide CPU utilization
and can dynamically scale the number of worker nodes up or down:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Cm Scale-up
When CPU utilization exceeds 80%, the governor logs a scale-up event.
.It Cm Scale-down
When CPU utilization drops below 30%, the governor logs a scale-down event.
.It Cm Hard Cap
The
.Va max_workers
parameter enforces a hard limit that never exceeds the number of CPU cores
.Pq Va mp_ncpus .
Setting
.Va max_workers=0
auto-detects to the number of CPU cores.
.El
.Pp
The governor logs scale-up/scale-down intent; actual worker creation/removal
is handled by userland tools
.Pq Xr ngctl 8 , Xr pppoed 8 .
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available under
.Va net.graph.pppoe_lb :
.Bl -tag -width ".Va debug"
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.total_packets
Total number of packets processed by the load balancer.
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.discovery_packets
Number of PPPoE discovery packets (PADI/PADO/PADR/PADS).
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.session_packets
Number of PPPoE session data packets.
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.session_collisions
Number of hash collisions detected in session-to-worker mapping.
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.active_workers
Current number of active worker nodes.
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.active_sessions
Current number of active PPPoE sessions.
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.algorithm
Current load balancing algorithm (0=round-robin, 1=hash, 2=least-loaded).
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.max_workers
Governor maximum workers (0=auto-detect to CPU cores, >0=explicit hard cap).
.It Va net.graph.pppoe_lb.debug
Enable debug logging (0=disabled, 1=enabled).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Load the kernel module:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldload ng_pppoe_lb
.Ed
.Pp
Create a load balancer topology with 4 workers:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ngctl name . pppoe_lb0
ngctl mkpeer pppoe_lb0: pppoe worker0
ngctl mkpeer pppoe_lb0: pppoe worker1
ngctl mkpeer pppoe_lb0: pppoe worker2
ngctl mkpeer pppoe_lb0: pppoe worker3
ngctl connect em0: pppoe_lb0 upstream
.Ed
.Pp
Configure load balancer with hash algorithm and 8-worker cap:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl net.graph.pppoe_lb.algorithm=1
sysctl net.graph.pppoe_lb.max_workers=8
.Ed
.Pp
Query statistics:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ngctl pppoe_lb show pppoe_lb0:
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ngctl 8 ,
.Xr pppoed 8 ,
.Xr ng_pppoe 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm pppoe_lb
node type first appeared in FreeBSD 16.0 as part of the multithreaded PPPoE
implementation to support high-throughput broadband access concentrators.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mark LaPointe Aq Mt mark@cloudbsd.org
.Sh BUGS
The governor CPU monitoring currently uses system-wide CPU statistics.
Per-worker CPU monitoring is not yet implemented.
.Pp
The least-loaded algorithm (algorithm=2) has higher overhead and is not
recommended for production use with high session counts.
